in this video I'd like to talk about how
to initialize k-means and more
importantly this will lead into a
discussion of how to make k-means avoid
local optima as well here's the k-means
clustering algorithm that we talked
about earlier one step that we never
really talked much about was this step
of how you randomly initialize the
cluster centroids there are a few
different ways that one could imagine
using to randomly initialize the cluster
centroids but it turns out that there's
one method that's much more recommended
than most of the other options one might
think about so let me tell you about
that option so this is what often seems
the world's best here's how I usually
initialize my cluster centroids when
running k-means you should have the
number of cluster centroids K is set to
be less than the number of training
examples M it would be really weird to
run k-means with a number of cluster
centroids this you know equal or greater
than the number of examples you have
right so the way I usually initialize
k-means is i would randomly pick kt
training examples so and what I do is
then set me one up to MU k equal to
these K examples let me show you a
concrete example let's say that K is
equal to 2 and so on this example right
let's say I want to find 2 clusters so
what I'm going to do in order to
initialize my cluster centroids is I'm
going to randomly pick a couple of
examples and let's say I pick this one
and I pick that one and the way I'm
going to initialize my cluster centroids
is I'm going to just going to initialize
my cluster centroids to be right on top
of those examples so that's my first
cluster centroid and that's my second
cluster centroid and that's one two
random initialization of k-means the one
I drew looks like a particularly good
one sometimes I might get less lucky and
maybe I'll end up picking that as my
first randomly chosen example and that
as my sec
one and here I'm picking two examples
because K equals two so I randomly pick
two training examples and if I chose
those two then I'll end up with maybe
this is my first cluster centroid and
that as my second initial location of
the cluster centroid so that's how you
can randomly initialize the cluster
centroids and so at initialization your
first cluster centroid v1 will be equal
to X I for some random e value of I and
mu 2 will be equal to XJ for some
different randomly chosen value of J and
so on if you have more clusters in work
versus employees as sort of a side
comment I should say that in the earlier
video where I first illustrated k-means
with an it with an animation in that set
of slides only for the purpose of
illustration I actually use a different
method of initialization for my cluster
centroids but the method described on
this slide this is really edia
recommended way that the way that you
should probably use when you implement
k-means so as i suggested perhaps by
these two illustrations on the right you
might really guess that k-means can end
up converging to different solutions
depending on exactly how the clusters
were initialized and so depending on the
random initialization k-means can end up
at different solutions and in particular
k-means can actually end up at local
optima if you're given the data set like
this one looks like you know there are
three clusters and so if you run k-means
and if it ends up at a good local firm
this might be really the global optimum
you might end up with that clustering
but if you have a particularly unlucky
random initialization k-means can also
get stuck at different local Optima so
in this example on the left you know it
looks like the blue cluster has captured
a lot of points on the left
and then I ran down the green clusters
each is capturing only a relatively
small number of points and so this
corresponds to a bad local optima
because it has basically taken these two
clusters and merge them into one and
furthermore what it has split the second
cluster into two separate sub clusters
like so and it has also taken the second
cluster and split it into two separate
sub clusters like so and so both of
these examples on the lower right
correspond to different local optima of
k-means and in fact in this example here
the cluster the vague cluster has
captured only a single unlabeled example
and the local optima by the way refers
to local optima of this distortion
function J and what these solutions on
the lower left what these local optima
correspond to is really solutions where
Keeney's has gotten stuck to the local
optima and is not doing a very good job
minimizing this distortion function J so
if you're worried about k-means getting
stuck in local optima if you want to
increase the odds of k-means finding the
best possible clustering like that shown
on top here what we can do is try
multiple random initializations so
instead of just initializing k means
once and hoping that that works what we
can do is initialize k-means lots of
times in run k-means lots of times and
use that to try to make sure we get as
good a solution as good a local or
global optimum as possible concretely
here's how you could go about doing that
let's say I decide to run k-means a
hundred times so I'm going to execute
this loop a hundred times and a fairly
typical number of times I run k-means
would be something from 50 up to maybe a
thousand so but let's say let's say you
decide to write k ds 100 times so what
that means is we were randomly initial
initialize k-means and for each of these
100 random initializations we rerun
k-means and now you give us a set of
clustering
cluster centroids and we will then
compute the distortion J that is compute
this cost function on the set of cluster
assignments and cluster centroids that
we got finally having done this whole
procedure 100 times you will have a
hundred different ways of clustering the
data and then finally what you do is out
of these hundred ways we have found if
clustering the data just pick one that
gives us the lowest cost if it does
little less distortion and it turns out
that if you're running k-means with a
fairly small number of clusters so you
know if the number of clusters is
anywhere from 2 up to maybe 10 then
doing multiple random initializations
can often can sometimes make sure that
you find a better local offer make sure
you find a better clustering of the data
but if K is very large so if K is much
greater than 10 certainly of K where if
you're trying to find hundreds of
clusters then having multiple random
initializations is less likely to make a
huge difference and there's much higher
chance that your first random
initialization will give you a pretty
decent solution already and doing doing
multiple random initializations
will probably give you a slightly better
solution but but maybe not that much but
it's really in the regime of when you
have a relatively small number of
clusters especially if we have maybe two
or three or four clusters that's a
random initialization could make a huge
difference in terms of making sure you
do a good job minimizing the distortion
function and giving you a good
clustering
so that's k-means with random
initialization if you're trying to learn
a clustering with a relatively small
number of clusters two three four five
maybe six seven using multiple random
initializations can sometimes help you
find much better clusterings of the data
but even if you are learning a large
number of clusters the initialization
the random initialization method I
described here that should give k-means
a reasonable starting point to start
from for finding a good set of clusters